Reuven, welcome back to Talk By The Mii. How are you doing?
I'm doing great. Great to be back here. Nice to see you.
Yeah, it's great to see you as well. I'm a little concerned though.
There's some possibilities that maybe my Facebook ads are going to get messed up.
We are talking about pandas and pandas internationally.
And I heard that you're some kind of animal trafficker.
You want to start the show with that story? It's out of control.
It is the craziest story. So I occasionally advertise on Facebook,
advertise my pandas and Python training.
And I guess it was like two years ago, I tried doing a little bit more advertising.
And basically I didn't really pay much attention to it until about a year ago
when I noticed that when I tried to do some more advertising and it said,
you are not allowed to advertise on any meta properties.
That's really weird. Like what did I do?
I looked, I could not find any indication of what I'd done wrong.
So it says, if you want to appeal, click here. So I clicked here.
And within 30 minutes or so, I get emailed back saying,
your appeal has been checked and denied.
You will never be allowed to advertise on any meta property again.
And this was like, what have I done?
I feel like I'm pretty innocent. Just some courses and some books. Come on, man.
I figured also I appealed, someone must have looked through this.
Anyway, in poking around online, someone said to me, oh, I was caught by the same thing.
It is illegal to sell rare and endangered animals.
And they believe that since you were selling Python and pandas training,
then you must have been trading in live and endangered animals,
and thus you are banned for life.
Well, I said, you know what? I got some, first of all, like nuts,
and yet a great story to tell to my machine learning classes.
So good on that front.
But I was like, this is easy to resolve, right?
I'll just contact someone on Facebook. No one's available.
I text some of my connections, like people I know who work there,
and I finally get the answer back saying that for legal purposes,
they delete all data that's more than six months old, something like that.
So they could not go back and check to see why I was banned,
and thus this ban really would be for life.
So because I waited a while, because it had been like a year between the ban and me noticing,
so they couldn't do anything about it.
So I was like half laughing and half like, you got to be kidding me about this.
And I posted on my blog about this, and you guys picked it up on Python Bytes.
It was picked up in a bunch of other places like Hacker News.
And about a month later, I checked, and it was back.
No one told me anything. No one said anything.
Just magically and quietly, my account was restored.
Running to the press never helps.
That's right. But it was so absurd.
And I think it was at least like four senior engineers at Facebook who tried to help me with this.
And they were all like, "We tried. There's nothing we can do."
Crazy. It reminds me, honestly, it reminds me so much of my App Store review experience,
getting the new Talk Python training mobile apps in iOS, in the iOS App Store and the Google App Store.
They were tragically incompetent in their own special way.
Somewhat malicious, somewhat not malicious.
Like, for example, Apple, I think it was Apple, could have been, I don't know, Apple or Google.
It has to be one of them, said, "We've denied your application to publish this application
because you're trying to impersonate in an existing one."
I said, "What app am I trying to impersonate?"
Like, it's hundreds of hours of stuff that we've created.
They're like, "Well, first you might be hijacked."
So, in the description it says, "If you want to learn Python, you can take our courses."
Well, there's already an app called LearnPython and you're trying to impersonate.
I'm like, "What?"
They're like, "It said, 'If you want to learn Python,' but there's an app called LearnPython."
I'm like, "I just don't even understand. My mind is—how do you read that description
and think this is a trademark?"
So, if you come up with an app called, like, "Eat at a restaurant," then no food order delivery place will do.
Yeah, you're going to be acquired by UberEATS straight away.
Exactly.
And so, we went—but you would think, "Okay, fair mistake.
Yay, okay, something caught it.
Just like you said, a simple request and a human will look and it'll be fine."
No, they're like, "Well, look, obviously you're doing this."
Obviously.
Let's try another scenario.
What if I said I wanted to learn to play the guitar and there was an app called LearnGuitar,
but I don't want to learn—the title is not LearnGuitar, just the act of learning a guitar.
How else would you explain it?
Like, "Oh, okay, so I guess we see, we understand now you can have that sentence."
It's just—these things are really—and you're at the complete mercy of them.
It's really—it's both comically funny, but it's also painful because
we spent four months building that app they wouldn't accept for this stupid reason.
And they're taking a fair amount of money off the top for whatever people are earning from these apps.
It's not like this is a charity or something.
What I found amazing with Facebook was there was literally no way to contact a human being.
I tried all sorts of searches and forums and on, on, and on.
And I found a lot of other people who had been caught up in this sort of ridiculous situation.
But there's no form even to say, "Hey, I think you made a mistake.
Why don't you have a human look at this?"
Because that would cost them too much, you know, someone's salary.
Yeah, absolutely.
Anyway, I don't want to spend too much time on it, but boy, is that a crazy story.
And I mean, we're going to be trading in some pandas today.
And so I just, I'm going to bleep that part.
Every time the word "pandas" is said, we're bleeping it out on the YouTube version.
Well, this could be entertaining then.
Wow, Ruben was really testy.
Like, all those bleeps, what was he saying?
No, seriously though, you know, let's, let's catch up.
We'll talk about your book.
What have you been up to since the last time we spoke?
I can't remember the last time I had you on.
It's been a couple of years, I think.
It's been, it's been some time, yeah.
So I'm continuing to do Python Pandas training at companies.
Since the pandemic, much more of it is online, just because companies, you know,
used to doing stuff on Zoom, Team, WebEx, rather than bringing me there in person.
That's fine, so I travel to conferences rather than to clients.
And, you know, it sort of extended my flexibility on that.
And I've also been building up my online training stuff, both a whole lot of courses.
I've got an online boot camp that I run for Python Pandas twice a year.
The big thing, which is actually connected to what we're doing here also,
is I have a new newsletter called Bamboo Weekly, where I have Pandas exercises.
Sort of like the same style as the book, but every week I take a topic
and I do it based on current events.
So if there's something going on in the news, I try to find a data set,
a real world data set that has something to do with that.
And then we try to experiment with that.
Yeah, that sounds really fun, to see like a real world example every week.
Yeah, yeah. So people are like, "How do you come up with that?"
And I say, "Well, I listen to a lot of podcasts and I read a lot of newspapers
and something somewhere, like I read The Economist, for example,
and they had this short, cute article about the number of animals
that go through Heathrow Airport every year."
I was like, "Wait, there's got to be a data set for that."
And sure enough, the Heathrow Airport Authority publishes a data set in CSV
of how many animals go through.
And it was like 200 horses and 1.5 billion butterflies
and everything in between.
And so it was great fun to sort of play with that data
and ask questions about it and give people practice
with something that's dirty and messy.
I don't mean the animals being dirty, right?
Like, they're messy and you need to really wrestle with it
because that's the only way you're going to improve.
So I'm having a lot of fun on all the training front.
I definitely see more and more use of--I'm sure this won't surprise you--
more and more use of Python in the data space
as it just catches fire there.
Yeah. It's just going downhill, picking up speed, isn't it?
It's extraordinary.
I still remember asking people in my intro Python courses,
"So what are you here for?"
They were like, "Yeah, my company's thinking of doing some stuff
with data analysis and pandas."
Or at least data analysis, I think it was then even in NumPy
before pandas came out.
And me thinking, "Hmm, I should really learn this stuff
because it sounds like it's going to be popular."
And holy cow, it's everywhere.
And the whole ecosystem is just growing and growing and growing.
It's like people are sort of seeing pandas
as the underlying infrastructure on which they build their software tools
and their companies even.
Right, or even the thing that defines the API
on which they can innovate, right?
Think Dask or a whole bunch of other things in that space, right?
If you know pandas, chances are, if you're not too crazy,
you can do grid computing by changing the import.
It's extraordinary, just extraordinary.
Yeah, it absolutely is.
And so back to your newsletter, Pandas Eat Bamboo, is that right?
I understand why you're banned from Facebook.
It was actually my father's idea.
I was like, "I need a catchy name for something."
And so he was like, "Well, something with bamboo."
I was like, "Right, right."
It's food for thought and food for pandas.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Yeah, that's actually really clever.
I like it a lot. I like it a lot.
So you've been on a journey.
You've been on a journey to write a book, right?
Yes, I was convinced to do a second one.
Right, so I did a book with Manning called Python Workout,
which was exercises in Python.
And when that finished, they said,
"So what other topics do you think would be useful?"
I said, "Well, doing a lot of pandas,
and people definitely need a lot of exercise
and a lot of practice in that."
And so I got to work both collecting the exercises I do
with my corporate training and also coming up with some new ones
as I learn new things, because pandas are so, so, so huge
that it's very easy to get lost in there
and not even know what are the important topics to learn.
And so thanks to working with people all the time,
I sort of see also where they get stuck
and where they have problems and where it's really confusing to them.
So, yeah, so 200 and some odd exercises later.
By the way, I'll just tell you why did it come out when it came out,
because I'm terribly bad at deadlines.
I said to the Manning people, "I really want to have it at my booth at PyCon."
They said, "Okay, big talker. You want it mid-May, huh?
So you'd better have everything done."
And they sort of backtracked on the calendar and said,
"Okay, so you'd better have the whole thing done by December."
And then finally I had some fire under me and got it done.
I suppose to them.
I should get more done.
Yeah, the version I actually have in my Apple Books here I pulled up
is the Manning Early Access Preview version,
but it's out for real now, yeah?
Here, I've even got the paper copy here.
What?
I know, I know.
That's a pretty hefty book, honestly.
That's a proper book.
I know, I know.
It's really quite some feeling there.
I guess I really finished it.
Congratulations.
So I wanted to talk to you about maybe just kind of following on
with your Bamboo idea.
Like give us some examples.
Give us some problems that people are solving with Pandas.
I mean, we're not going to talk through the code super detailed,
but you could say like this aspect or this feature of Pandas,
like .loc or whatever, is how you access and solve these problems, right?
So just kind of exploring that space.
I had Wes McKinney on four or five episodes ago, something like that,
and I was just like, how do you learn Pandas?
It's like so big, you know?
So I've actually changed -- well, let me first say I'm definitely one of
those people who thinks you should learn Python before Pandas.
Like I definitely think that knowing the language well will serve you
very, very well in all sorts of weird small ways necessarily.
But at the same time, when you learn Pandas,
you have to learn that some of the paradigms you learned,
like some of the idioms from Python, are not appropriate.
So I was giving a class in like optimizing Pandas,
like a short class, what I call a micro class, like 90 minutes long,
about a year or so ago.
And at the end, I was like, oh, and by the way,
obviously just never do for loops.
Everyone's like, wait, wait, wait, what?
I said, what do you mean what?
And they were like, we were taught in our intro to Pandas class
that you should do a for loop to do anything across the data frame.
And I was like, okay, what?
How can this be?
And so people think that because it's in Python,
you should do it the same way.
But there are all these different idioms,
especially with vectorization, that you need to internalize.
Otherwise, as I like to say to people,
you should hope to be paid by the hour because like these things are just
going to take forever to run.
And so people don't necessarily understand sort of how to approach
Pandas stuff.
And then they don't understand sort of, let's see, I mean,
I'll give like outline and then we can sort of go into it.
Certainly how to access things with .lock.
Certainly how multi-indexes work.
How to work with the different D types.
Because these are things that we don't think about in the standard Pandas
world each day.
The closest analogy would maybe be that where you're working with a
dictionary, you want to think about what your keys are going to be.
But even then it doesn't come close to it.
So like .lock, people are like, so fine.
So .lock is used for retrieving from a series or retrieving from a data
frame.
But it's so much more than that because you have two parts to it,
potentially two parts.
You have the row selector and you have the column selector.
And each of those can be an individual name, a list of names,
a Boolean series, or even a Lambda.
And you can mix and match those in so many different ways.
And once you see those options, like your head sort of explodes with,
oh, wait, I never thought that I could access my data like that.
And then you're like, wait, you can also assign your data like that.
And then they're just sort of astonished.
Yeah, it's really wild.
I think Pandas has its own idiomatic style that is different than what you
would call Pythonic, right?
Like it's Pydantic?
I don't know what the name is.
Idiomatic Pandas, right?
Where there's things that are specific to Pandas,
like this vectorization stuff, right?
Instead of looping over, right, you know,
you think about the Python performance angles or the data science
performance angles, right?
A lot of the speed that we get out of tools like Pandas and NumPy and
Polars and others is because you take the data,
you push it down into some native layer and you just leave it there.
And you kind of speak to the native layer from Python.
And you say, deep down in your insides, you got this thing,
multiply all 1 million of them by 2 or whatever, right?
But if you loop over it, you're like converting it out of C into,
you know, Python objects.
Then you're operating it, then you're putting it back,
like just, you know, 2 million times.
And all of a sudden all those benefits are gone.
And so certainly learning those types of things.
I mean, the vectorization, I think most people get pretty soon,
although it sounds like not necessarily everyone.
I was really flabbergasted.
But there's way more than that, right?
That's just probably the most obvious thing.
Right, right.
I mean, so like accessing things in that way, by the way,
you asked before, like,
how should people even approach learning Pandas?
And so I've started thinking about it a little differently based on
feedback from people that I would sort of walk through it.
Okay, here's a series, here's a data frame.
And after creating some, you know, fake ones with, you know,
made up numbers or random numbers,
then we'll start reading in files and then we'll do this and then we'll
get to visualization.
And a student of mine said, you know,
you're sort of missing the big,
like people miss the big picture doing that and they want to get the
excitement.
Why don't you start with read a CSV file,
visualize it right there inside of Jupyter,
and then people will be so impressed and amazed.
And then you fill in the gaps.
And so I started doing that a bit.
And I think that has not been a bad approach to catch their attention,
give them a sense of what the possibilities are.
I'm like, okay,
let's now walk through each of these little pieces and build up to what we
saw that first day.
And that's been fun.
Yeah.
I totally agree.
That's also something that I really strive for.
I don't always do whenever I'm doing presentations, but you know,
just because someone is chosen to sit in a seat for a day long course or an
hour long presentation doesn't mean that they couldn't use a little
inspiration. Right.
And if you can like, wow,
you did those three lines and now we have this picture and I understand all
that, like, tell me more, right.
That right there.
Right.
Now you have their actual attention the whole time and they're enjoying it.
And it's yeah.
It's so often there's like, well, in order to show you the nice stuff,
I got to give you every level of details.
Like, no, you don't, you're going to, you're going to make them leave.
Don't do it that way.
That's right.
And you mentioned like three lines of code.
One of the amazing things about pandas is how often you can write very,
very little code, but it's like getting to that code.
That takes a while really taking advantage of it.
Yeah.
So we've been knowing that it's possible.
Right, right, right, right.
People don't even know.
So a lot of times, like I've been using it now for long enough that I sort
of intuit, oh, there's gotta be a method that does this.
Like someone has encountered this problem before.
And so either there's a method or there's an option or there's an add on
like something somewhere that just makes it trivially easy.
And that's part of the exploration that I try to do both in the book,
and weekly, like in my training, and also truth be told,
I'm constantly learning stuff, right?
Like it's,
it's a rare for me to teach and not discover some option or some method
that I did not know about because it's just so incredibly vast.
Yeah.
Or pandas two comes out or something like that.
Yes.
Yes, indeed.
I mean, I've been exploring, I mean, tomorrow,
tomorrow I head off to Prague for EuroPython where I'm giving a talk on
Pyarrow in pandas.
And so I've been looking into that a lot and oh boy, right.
I mean, I've been using it for say a year or so, but it's amazing.
And yet there are all these subtle changes that are happening in pandas as
a result that you need to know about it.
You need to expect when, when you use it,
but it's another like tool in our toolbox that we can pull out to make pandas
more effective, more efficient, deal with larger data,
and also interact with other and interoperate with other systems.
Yeah, sure.
As I said, the whole ecosystem is just exploding.
It's really quite something to see.
Yeah, it really is.
And I think the pandas two stuff is going to make a pretty big difference
changing like the internals away from just, you know,
tables of numbers and basically, okay.
Let's talk about, so,
so the way I thought we could maybe explore this pandas workout book is
let's just pick some fun exercises that you put together and,
and talk about them.
Like give us a quick overview of what the workout aspect of this book means
anyway, then we'll, we'll pick the first one.
Sure.
So the idea is that you can't learn everything all at once or quickly.
That's sort of like, you know, working out physically.
It's a long haul and every day you get a little better, a little stronger,
a little more flexible.
And so if you see, you know,
your pandas learning journey as it's going to take me several months,
not going to take me a day.
Then if every day you do a little bit of practice,
you learn something new in some new direction.
At the end of that journey,
you're going to be able to solve many,
many more problems in better, more idiomatic and,
and more efficient ways.
And you'll be able to put these pieces together in ways that you didn't even
expect. So that's, that's the basic idea.
And so the book is divided into, I want to say 12 chapters.
I know we sort of rejiggered it at some point where each chapter focuses on a
different aspect of pandas.
But it's really sort of the, the total experience of going through it.
And so we have 200 exercises.
Plus there's like a, for lack of better term, a midterm and a final,
like a meteor projects that people can go through that people ask for after the
Python book.
And each exercise then has not only the main exercise where I pose a problem,
I give an explanation, I give an answer, note the order.
The answer comes at the end. So you won't peek as easily.
We talked about putting in the back of the book and like,
that just didn't work out so well.
So at least you have to wait through the explanation a little bit or turn the
page. And then after,
you can buy the one book with the questions.
You can buy, oh, are you serious? Okay.
You can buy the answers later.
I was joking. I didn't, I didn't mean,
I didn't mean to give anyone ideas. I'm joking.
No, no, it's fine. And then like after the answer,
we have three, what we call beyond the exercise, which are, okay,
now that you've kind of gotten the basics,
let's push either on the same data set or even like,
like sort of go farther. And so it's like,
that's why we say it's 200 exercises because it's 50 official exercises,
another three for each one. And those tend to be much harder.
And I don't give a full explanation,
although I do give the solution online in the Jupyter notebook,
you can download Jupyter for,
for all these things and see how I solved it. And for many of them,
there's a link to the pandas tutor. I think, yeah,
you've definitely spoken to Philip Guo in the past.
So yeah, it's not only a Python tutor, a pandas tutor, he and his team,
it's amazing. And so you can just click on a link and it will take you to,
usually a miniature version of the data set because it's too big for pandas
tutor. And then you can sort of see the visualization,
how these things work.
Yeah. I haven't, I don't think I've talked about pandas tutor.
Maybe I have talked to Philip about it,
but I've certainly used it in some of my courses, but
it's worth bringing up just to talk like to see how that thing works.
It's, it's something special, this thing,
it really gives you some deep understanding into like, okay, if I run, you know,
this group by command,
then here's how all the pieces like flow back together.
And so you're using this during your book.
So, yeah. So, I mean, every exercise has a link in the solution.
You click on it and brings you to the code that I use usually again,
sort of miniature version of the code,
miniature version of the data set that you can then see the visualization
there in, in your browser.
Nice. Yeah. Cause you've got a basic, I think, encode the data, the URL.
So it can't be too much.
Right. Right.
So I would like basically take the data in the data frame,
turn it into a Python dictionary and then like set it up because it won't
work with files for security reasons.
So assign that dictionary to a variable or no, no, I'm sorry.
I turned to CSV in a string and then assign that string to a variable and
then I would read it in and then I would see if it overflowed the pandas
work out that pandas tutor limit.
And if it did that sort of iterated until I got it small enough to fit in
there and big enough to be useful and interesting.
I took a few iterations.
That's cool. No, but it's a super, super good resource.
We're learning pandas. I also think for exploring, right?
Like you end up with some code that like,
I'm not really sure what this does, or this is actually new to me.
Like a lot of things you might encounter in this book.
Let me visualize that. Right. Because.
Right. Right.
I mean, I, as I said, like I do a lot of training in pandas and very often
people have already played with it a bit, used it,
even use it for a year or two. And because it's so large,
like it's not unusual for someone to say, Oh, I,
I had no idea this functionality existed.
Why have I been wasting my time doing X and Y and Z? Yeah.
And I'll give you one, one example that I've been using more and more.
So, you know, Matt Harrison's a big fan of the method training approach.
And at first I was like, yeah, yeah, yeah. Matt, whatever. Like, like, yo,
stop pushing out on everyone.
Fluent interfaces.
And then I was like, actually,
this is a great way to build things up little by little line by line.
And I can use this. It's pedagogically very useful. Cause I say, okay,
let's think about how we want to break down this problem. We'll do this.
Then we'll do this. Then we'll do this.
And then we'll do this. And then we'll do this.
And then we'll do this and then we'll do this and then we'll do this.
And then we'll do this and then we'll do this.
>> It does.
So it takes what would be multiple step things
and lets you turn it into one of those change expressions
because instead of defining a function somewhere else,
you can just put it in line as part of a lambda
and just keep on going, you know?
>> That's right.
And the fact that -- so it's especially useful, I find.
So we mentioned dot lock earlier.
So dot lock allows you to choose rows.
Let's start with that.
And so I can pass it a lambda.
And that lambda then gets the data frame you're working on
as an argument.
And then whatever it returns, if it returns a Boolean series,
then it allows you to filter.
Well, you can then have multiple dot locks
and multiple lambdas in a row to do successive filtering.
And yes, that is less efficient than doing it all in one fell swoop.
But boy, oh, boy, it's easier to think about
and it's easier to use.
So you just like whittle it down, whittle it down, whittle it down,
each line with its own lambda.
And so understanding how to do that,
understanding why it's important that the lambda
-- inside the lambda, you're using the temporary parameter
from the lambda as opposed to the overall variable
for your data frame because you're chaining it,
that's useful as well.
>> Well, 100%.
And then you can also like comment out certain lines at the end
and see what the intermediate values are.
And so you say it's less efficient.
It's less computationally efficient.
It might be more efficient as a human being
trying to understand what the heck is happening, right?
And that is spot on.
I often tell people that I think Python is a language for an age
in which computers are cheap and people are expensive
because like, right, our efficiency is the big bottleneck
in terms of time, in terms of money.
So, right, if it takes my computer a few seconds more,
who the heck cares?
>> My M2 Pro doesn't care if it's like a tiny bit more.
I don't care.
>> That's right. That's right.
>> Or my cluster of GPUs, take your pick.
Although at that point it starts to cost real money
to burn those things, you know?
>> Right, but still, I mean, depending on, look,
if you see that your computation is taking a long time, okay,
so then you sort of find that and you improve that.
>> Yeah, that's a really good point.
Like a lot of things are, don't worry about that
until it's actually going to become a problem.
It looks slow.
It turns out it's probably a blink of an eye.
All right, let's keep moving on.
We have a plethora of things to work with.
I kind of want to go to wine words.
>> Wine words, oh.
>> Wine words, all right.
Let me remember what exercise that is.
That is 37. All right.
>> Yeah. So people think of pandas, not wrongly,
as being great at working with numbers.
But it turns out that it's fantastic
at working with two other kinds of data types.
One is strings and one is dates and times.
And you can get a ton, a ton out of analysis
working with these if you know how to work with it.
So there is, I forget where it is,
like there's a machine learning archive of data sets.
And one of them is 150,000 wine reviews from Wine Magazine.
And so I said, okay.
>> Is it Kaggle maybe or is it somewhere else?
>> I think Kaggle has a version of it,
but I think it's elsewhere.
>> Wine Magazine, 150,000 reviews, okay.
>> I don't know. I'll find out where it is.
Anyway, so I said, okay, let's find out.
Because you drink a bottle of wine
and you read the back and you sort of
roll your eyes at what they've written.
Although I'll put in a plug,
I read this fantastic book a few years ago
called Cork Dork by this journalist
who decided to become a sommelier
and she took the exam and her journey toward there.
And she convinced me these words actually have real meaning
and people are very serious about it.
So I will not roll my eyes quite as much anymore.
>> I'm getting a hint of nutmeg, but they're troubling.
>> Yes.
>> They don't belong.
>> So the question was, okay, what about these reviews of wine?
What words are people using?
And are they using certain words more with California wines
and certain words more with French wines
or certain words more with red or with white or rosé?
And so we can then take this text,
break it apart and search for it.
And we can search for it using plain old Panda stuff.
We can search for it using regular expressions,
which it has built in and works very well.
So here, so let's see, something else on the words.
Here, so one of the 10 most common words for red wines.
Right, so how do we do that?
Well, we have to take the description and break it apart.
And if you're used to using just plain old Python,
you're like, oh, well, I guess I'll break that
into a list, but now what?
Now I have a series of lists.
Now what do I do?
And so one of the key methods to know here
is something called explode.
And explode is let's take a series of lists
and turn that into a very, very, very long series.
And so basically each element in the list
becomes an element in the series,
and they all share an index.
So you know where they're originally from.
And then, you know, the world's your oyster.
So you can get rid of punctuation.
Right, so I have a s.str lower.
Okay, so we lowercase everything.
Then .str split, and we split into a list.
Then we say explode, get into a long series.
Then we once again run strip, get rid of punctuation.
And now we can use is in,
which is yet another fantastic Pandas method
to say are these words in,
like find the lines where these words are located.
And then we can just do a value count,
definitely my favorite method.
How often does this thing show up?
And then we use head, ta-da,
we've got the 10 most common words there.
And when you break it down like that--
- The most common, the counts,
the value counts sorts probably most,
most common to least common, right?
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
So value counts not only does it count
how often something shows up,
but exactly, it sorts it from most common to least common.
So then you just use head--
- So then head is, yeah, if you want, yeah,
however much you take there, and then that's the ones.
Those are the popular ones.
- So here I have like, you know,
the page we're looking at.
So we get find where the country is France.
So that's the row selector.
And we want the console to be description.
So we only want the description.
And then we have our function top 10 words,
which did what I just described.
We're gonna take these common wine words,
lowercase them, get rid of the punctuation, so forth,
pass it in, and we get back our top words.
And we find out what words are used to,
are associated with French wines
as opposed to California wines,
and so on and so forth.
So that's a very, very cool example.
All right, I think we got time for two more to go through.
Do you wanna pick two that are popular?
- Let's see, let's see.
Let's do maybe 32, multi-city, actually, yeah.
Oh, you know what, actually--
- Multi-city tippers?
- Yeah, let's do best tippers.
- Best tippers, all right.
- Yeah, you mentioned tipping before.
- All right, let's do 42, let's go.
- No judgment here, folks.
All right, so the question is,
so we'll try to understand as we're here,
when people tip their taxi drivers more generously.
All right, so the question was,
did they tip better, and we looked at 2019,
before the pandemic, in January and July.
So do they tip more in the winter,
or do they tip more in the summer?
And so this involves several things.
First of all, it involved using dates and times.
Again, one of these things that Pandas is just amazing at,
that people are not aware
of all the flexibility you have there.
Another thing is how easy it is to create a new column.
Right, so we spoke before a bit
of how you can use broadcasting to just multiply.
I have a column, multiply it by something,
or a column, add it to another column.
But you can create a new column just by assigning to it.
Again, it's sort of like assigning to a dictionary.
It just then is there.
And so you can calculate the percentage
that people tip, put that in a new column,
and then say, "Well, let's now group by the month,
and let's find out what percentage people group by."
- Take the mean or the max or the deviation.
- Exactly, exactly. - Yeah, okay.
- And we can find out whether people tip more, on average,
in January or in July.
I honestly don't remember what the answer is,
(laughing)
which will hopefully not tick off too many readers.
Here we go, let's see what it says.
Oh, here we go, go back one page there.
So 32% of taxi riders in New York don't tip at all.
That's right, that was a surprising thing to me.
And then I don't remember exactly what it was
the different months. - Yeah.
And you're talking summer versus winter,
there's probably a tourism angle
versus non, locals versus tourists.
I mean, I know people go to New York
not in the summer, but not as much, I imagine.
- That's right, that's right.
- It's a little colder there. - There are all these
different factors that come into it.
- Yeah, one of the things, kind of takeaways I'm feeling
as we were talking about all these is like,
there's a lot of interesting questions
that can be asked and answered really quickly
for like sociology and urban planning
and all kinds of interesting questions
that don't feel like programmer questions.
- Yes, so, you know, I mean, I talk to a lot of people,
you probably do too, who are like interested
in advancing their careers with Python.
And they're like, well, you know,
I don't have a computer science background,
can I get a job as a programmer?
And their vision of a programmer is either someone
working at a startup or at like one of the big companies,
Google, Amazon, Facebook, and so forth.
I say to them, look, there are an awful lot of people
who have great jobs working at supermarket chains
and insurance companies in the backroom analyzing data.
And they are crucial,
but we don't think of them as programmers.
And in governments and cities and weather forecasting,
like everyone nowadays is using data
and collecting and analyzing it.
And having these skills either gives you abilities
to do your job better, or gives you the ability
to move into a new job that you couldn't have done before
that these places are desperately looking to fill.
- Yeah, I totally agree.
I can't remember which episode it was.
I didn't name it right.
So here's an episode I did quite a while ago
where I had our programmers and our data scientists
and Python data scientists working together.
And I think it was the research arm of Kroger maybe
that had like 200 data scientists.
- Wow.
- That's a proper group of data scientists.
I mean, a lot of times data scientists,
I feel like there's a couple of them for a company
compared to a software team or something.
- No, and I tell people also,
it's worth learning to write
and it's worth learning to speak,
not because you're gonna be like, you know,
a Pulitzer Prize winning writer,
whatever prize you would get for like speaking well,
just because having these skills
makes you more effective at your job.
And people who can write a program
to suck up some data, analyze it,
and come back with a result,
especially if it's like a public data set
that has something to do with what they're working on,
they are so much more valuable to their company
than they would have been otherwise.
- Oh yeah, absolutely.
So I found it because I have a search engine
on Talk Python that searches the transcripts
on top of everything else.
If you wanna know something, people,
about historical shows, when you hit search,
it's not just like the show notes.
So scaling data science across Python and R,
episode 236, with Ethan Swan, Bradley Boekme,
and the company is 84.51 degrees.
- Oh, I've seen that thing before.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's what it was.
I would check that out if there's interested.
- Very, very cool.
- Yeah, super cool.
Okay, last one.
What are we doing?
- Let's do cities.
- Cities, what number is it?
- 43.
So I found a few years ago this JSON file
containing the thousand largest cities
in the United States.
So first of all, good to work with JSON
'cause people need to know how to work
with JSON.
Second of all, okay, let's not look at the numbers
so much as let's do some plotting.
And so I'm going to make enemies now.
I really cannot handle matplotlib.
I find it, it's like so incredibly powerful
and anytime I wanna do even the tiniest thing with it,
I have to look up the documentation
and remind myself how it works.
Maybe it's 'cause I don't use it enough.
And so I just use the pandas interface
90% of the time, let's call it 90% of the time.
The rest of the time I usually use Seaborn.
So I said, okay, let's see if we can do some plotting here
of these largest cities.
So for example, let's see growth in Pennsylvania cities.
Like which cities in Pennsylvania?
Oh, I'm sorry, like let's see a dual bar plot.
How many large cities are in each state?
Okay, well, that's a group by, right?
So you have to know how to do grouping.
You have to know what you're grouping on
and how to use count as opposed to mean, right?
That count even exists.
So if you wanna do a bar plot
where it's sorted from smallest to largest,
you gotta know how to do sorting.
And then we can do a bar plot.
So sure enough, you do a dot plot dot bar on your series,
kablam, you have a bar plot right there.
And you can get it in, like, you know,
it's nicely sorted there.
- Quick takeaways.
Holy cow, does California have more big cities
than I realized?
And you know, where's New York and New Jersey?
Like it's way down the line.
You think of those as having like
a lot of mass cities.
- That's right, that's right.
But it's how many cities, right?
So, right, right, right.
So keep going.
So like do a bar plot of growth in Pennsylvania.
So how are we gonna do that?
Well, wait a second.
If we wanna do growth, it's a percentage.
But it's written in the JSON as number
and then percent sign.
That's a string.
So we're gonna have to get rid of the percent sign.
And then we're gonna have to change the D type
from string to a floating point.
And then we can graph it.
- So the S type changing the D type
basically is deep down inside of Pandas
parse as an integer operation, right?
Rather than looping over and parsing or whatever.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Like basically, I mean, it has to do the looping.
It's doing the looping there at, you know,
as I like to say, below sea level.
- Yeah, below sea level.
Down by the Dead Sea, I see, okay.
- And so you see here, like this bar plot,
now we have a whole bunch of cities
that have gone down in size
and a bunch of cities that have gone up in size.
And Pandas is very happy to, you know,
show the bar plot there.
You know, again, sorted so that we see it
from the greatest sort of shrinkage
to the greatest growth.
- Right, with Pittsburgh having the most shrinkage
and Allentown having the most growth,
I would have not guessed that.
- I would not have either, given that like
my sister-in-law and brother-in-law live in Allentown
and they're like, "Oh, Allentown."
But I think that's a common thing
that people think there, even though it seems
like a perfectly great place to be.
- Yeah, sure.
Funny.
- Awesome.
- Well, there's a lot of quick takeaways from this.
- One more, let me just show you one more.
Go to the last one here in this exercise.
- Okay.
- So one of the most important types of plots
you can do in data analysis is a scatter plot.
And you take your data frame and you say,
"Give me the plot with, based on your, you know,
"the X axis should be this, the Y axis should be that."
Well, if we do a scatter plot based on longitude
and latitude of the thousand largest US cities,
you basically come up with a map of the US.
- Yeah, how interesting.
The other thing that you realize is California
is technically bigger than a lot of other states.
So that also counts for why.
- Oh, yes.
- Yeah, interesting.
But there's a lot of people in California.
It's a good place to be.
- There are a lot of people there for sure.
- If they're willing to pay the sunshine tax, it's nice.
(laughing)
Cool, all right, Reuven.
This is really, really excellent.
I know you want to give a shout out
to a couple of exercises from Bamboo Weekly.
So I'll include those in the show notes as well.
And people can like take those
and jump over and look at them as well.
- That's fine, that's great.
Yeah, no, we went through a lot here
just during this time.
- Yeah, for sure.
- But there's basically, I mean, there is,
there's an infinite number of these sorts of things
that you can do and different permutations
of various sorts.
I mean, we didn't even talk about like, you know,
multi-indexing, which opens up literally
a whole new dimension of this stuff.
But it's great fun, it's pretty great fun.
- Yeah, and a lot of the pandas 2 stuff coming on
changes the foundation and opens up
more possibilities still.
- Absolutely.
- All right, well, final thoughts,
final call to action.
What do we got here, what do you say?
- Well, call to action, I mean,
you can take a look at like,
I guess my overall courses and so forth
at learnerpython.com.
Or if you just want to improve your pandas knowledge,
you can look at bambooweekly.com,
the newsletter there.
- Does it cost money or is it just a constant email?
- So, it is a paid newsletter,
but the first two questions and answers
every week are free.
So, like, it's usually between
five and nine questions each week.
But even if you don't pay,
I still want people to get some
pandas learning improvement practice,
so they can totally do that.
- Excellent.
- Yeah.
- All right, yeah, and check out the book, obviously.
- Oh, yeah, that too, pandasworkout.com.
I'll hold this up here.
- Yay.
- It's actually pretty thick.
- Yes, it is.
- At the end, I was like,
oh, that's why it took a long time.
Also procrastination, but you know.
- Yeah, wow.
- But I'd love to hear from people if they have,
I always love to hear, like,
sort of interesting problems,
data sets, issues that people are experiencing,
just so I can sort of figure out
what are the next directions for me to explore
that I can then try to help people with as well.
- Awesome.
Well, I appreciate all your help coming on the show,
sharing your knowledge,
and just riffing on pandas together.
It was a lot of fun.
- Excellent, my great pleasure.
- Yeah, bye.
All right, bye-bye